Styling Next.js with Styled JSX (#285)
zeit/next-site: www/pages/blog/styling-next-with-styled-jsx.amp.mdx

import withPost from '../../components/blog/with-post'
import Image from '../../components/image'
import { meta } from '../../blog/styling-next-with-styled-jsx-preview.mdx'

export default withPost({ ...meta })

> [Styled JSX](https://github.com/zeit/styled-jsx) is a CSS-in-JS library that allows you to write isolated scoped CSS to style your components. The styles you introduce for one component don't affect other components, so you can add, change and delete styles without worrying about unintended side effects.

Reviewer: > allows you to write isolated scoped CSS

I'd say encapsulated and scoped CSS

The difference being that "isolated" CSS has also the inherited properties reset for example `color` `font` etc. 
Instead (like in ShadowDOM) we let those inherit (reflect) the parent's value - until you set an actual value for them of course.

Reviewer: this should be updated in the preview too

## Getting started

> Next.js includes Styled JSX by default, so getting started is as simple as adding a <br /> `<style jsx>` tag into your existing Next.js component and writing CSS inside of it:

Reviewer: > tag into your existing Next.js component

I'd say into your existing React element

```js
// pages/index.js
function Home() {
  return (
    <div className="container">
      <h1>Hello Next.js</h1>
      <p>Let's explore different ways to style Next.js apps</p>
      <style jsx>{`
        .container {
          margin: 50px;
        }
        p {
          color: blue;
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Home
```

> In this example, we're including styles for the component's container element and a paragraph. Even though we are using generic selectors, the styles don't affect elements with `container` class name or `<p>` elements in other components because Styled JSX ensures that the styles are scoped to this specific component (by applying additional unique class names to styled elements).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, we're including styles for the component's container element and a paragraph. Even though we are using generic selectors, the styles don't affect elements with the `container` class name or `<p>` tag in other components. This is because Styled JSX ensures the styles are scoped to this component only (by applying additional unique class names to styled elements).
```

> Just by adding a single `jsx` attribute to a `<style>` element you can write standard CSS that gets automatically scoped to the component and auto prefixed. `<style jsx>` elements should be placed inside the root element of the component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By adding just a single `jsx` attribute to a `<style>` element, you can write standard CSS that gets auto prefixed and automatically scoped to the component. `<style jsx>` elements should be placed inside the root element of the component.
```

## Adding global styles

Most projects need some global styles to style the body element or provide css resets. Styled JSX allows us to add global styles using `<style jsx global>`. For example:

```js
// pages/index.js
function Home() {
  return (
    <div className="container">
      <h1>Hello Next.js</h1>
      <p>Let's explore different ways to style Next.js apps</p>
      <style jsx>{`
        .container {
          margin: 50px;
        }
        p {
          color: blue;
        }
      `}</style>
      <style jsx global>{`
        p {
          font-size: 20px;
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Home
```

This applies a 20px font-size to all `<p>` tags in this specific page.

> To apply global styles to all pages in our app, a good approach is to first create a layout component with the global styles, and then to wrap all pages with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To apply global styles to all pages in our app, a good approach is to first create a layout component with the global styles, then wrap all other pages with it.
```

```js
// components/Layout.js
function Layout(props) {
  return (
    <div className="page-layout">
      {props.children}
      <style jsx global>{`
        body {
          margin: 0;
          padding: 0;
          font-size: 18px;
          font-weight: 400;
          line-height: 1.8;
          color: #333;
          font-family: sans-serif;
        }
        h1 {
          font-weight: 700;
        }
        p {
          margin-bottom: 10px;
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Layout
```

In Next.js, we can load the layout once for all pages by creating a custom [`App` component](https://nextjs.org/docs/#custom-app) within `pages/_app.js`, importing the `Layout` component, and then adding it to the render method as follows:

```js
// pages/_app.js
import React from 'react'
import App, { Container } from 'next/app'
import Layout from '../components/Layout'

class MyApp extends App {
  render() {
    const { Component, pageProps } = this.props

    return (
      <Container>
        <Layout>
          <Component {...pageProps} />
        </Layout>
      </Container>
    )
  }
}

export default MyApp
```

### Writing styles in external files

> We can also place styles in external files outside of the component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also write styles in external files outside of the component.
```

For example, we can move our global styles from the `Layout` component into a separate file as follows:

```js
// styles/global.js
import css from 'styled-jsx/css'

export default css`
  body {
    margin: 0;
    padding: 0;
    font-size: 18px;
    font-weight: 400;
    line-height: 1.8;
    color: #333;
    font-family: sans-serif;
  }
  h1 {
    font-weight: 700;
  }
  p {
    margin-bottom: 10px;
  }
`
```

> and then include the styles back into the `Layout` component by importing the file with styles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can then import the styles back into the `Layout` component:
```

```js
// components/Layout.js
import globalStyles from '../styles/global.js'

function Layout(props) {
  return (
    <div className="page-layout">
      {props.children}
      <style jsx global>
        {globalStyles}
      </style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Layout
```

### One-off global selectors

> The styles that we add to a component using `<style jsx>` affect only the elements inside that component, they don't affect child components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The styles that we add to a component using `<style jsx>` affect only the elements inside that component, not child components.
```

> At times, we may need to override a certain style of a child component. To be able to do this, Styled JSX provides `:global()` to get _one-off global selectors_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At times, we may need to override a certain style of a child component. To do this, Styled JSX provides `:global()`, giving access to _one-off global selectors_.
```

> For example, let's say we have a `<Widget>` component that contains a button with a class name `btn` and we want to change the colors of this button only when the widget is imported on the homepage. We can do it like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, let's say we have a `<Widget>` component that contains a button with the class name `btn`. If we want to change the colors of this button, only when the widget is imported on the homepage, we can do so like this:
```

```js
// pages/index.js
import Widget from '../components/Widget'

function Home() {
  return (
    <div className="container">
      <h1>Hello Next.js</h1>
      <Widget />
      <style jsx>{`
        .container {
          margin: 50px;
        }
        .container :global(.btn) {
          background: #000;
          color: #fff;
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Home
```

## Dynamic styles

> Compared to other solutions, being able to adapt the styling of a component based on its props is one big advantage of `CSS-in-JS` libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compared to other solutions, being able to adapt the styling of a component based on its props is a big advantage of `CSS-in-JS` libraries.
```

> With Styled JSX we can do it like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Styled JSX we can do so like this:
```

```js
// components/Alert.js
function Alert(props) {
  return (
    <div className="alert">
      {props.children}
      <style jsx>{`
        .alert {
          display: inline-block;
          padding: 20px;
          border-radius: 8px;
        }
      `}</style>
      <style jsx>{`
        .alert {
          background: ${props.type == 'warning' ? '#fff3cd' : '#eee'};
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Alert
```

> If the `Alert` component is passed a `type` prop with a `warning` value like `<Alert type="warning">This is an important message</Alert>`, the component will have an orange background. Without specifying the type prop, the background would fallback to the default grey color.

Reviewer 2: This might be a short code snippet, but I think it would look better outside a body of text, this would certainly improve readability.

> Note that we placed the dynamic style into a separate `<style jsx>` tag. This isn't required, but it's recommended to split up static and dynamic styles so that only the dynamic parts are recomputed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that we placed the dynamic style into a separate `<style jsx>` tag. This isn't required, but it's **recommended** to split up static and dynamic styles so that only the dynamic parts are recomputed.
```

> An alternate approach to adapting styles based on props is applying different class names based on the prop value as shown below:

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to see a short discussion over why this isn't the recommended approach.

```js
// components/Alert.js
function Alert(props) {
  return (
    <div className={props.type == 'warning' ? 'alert warning' : 'alert'}>
      {props.children}
      <style jsx>{`
        .alert {
          display: inline-block;
          padding: 20px;
          border-radius: 8px;
          background: #eee;
        }
        .alert.warning {
          background: #fff3cd;
        }
      `}</style>
    </div>
  )
}

export default Alert
```

## Creating a site theme

A theme can be a simple object where we include the most common variables we might need in our app:

```js
// styles/theme.js
const theme = {
  fontFamily: {
    sansSerif: '-apple-system, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, sans-serif',
    mono: 'Menlo, Monaco, monospace'
  },
  colors: {
    text: '#333',
    background: '#fff',
    link: '#1eaaf1',
    linkHover: '#0d8ecf',
    border: '#ddd',
    warning: '#fff3cd',
    success: '#d4edda'
  }
}

export default theme
```

> Then we import this theme file in our components and replace _hardcoded_ values with variables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We then import this theme file in our components and replace _hardcoded_ values with variables:
```
